Tableau Challenge – Citi Bike Data

​      The first dashboard in the story contains maps of all the starting and ending stations sized according to the trip frequency from each. From the maps you can clearly see that both the starting and ending stations are concentrated mostly in the Manhattan area. Because of the large number of points, it is difficult to visualize much more. That leads to the next dashboard in the Story.

​      In the next dashboard there are maps and bar charts of the top 10 most frequent starting and ending locations. This makes it easily to visualize the top stations which led me to an interesting find: Perishing Square North is clearly the most frequent starting and ending stations. As I tried to determine the cause of this, I zoomed into the station and discovered that Perishing Square North is located next to the Grand Central Terminal. It makes sense that this would be a very frequent starting and ending point for various reasons including the daily work commute. I was then curious about which locations have the longest trip duration on average.

​      The longest average trip duration had some unexpected phenomenon that instantly stood out to me. For the starting stations, the stations with the longest trip duration on average  was outside of the Manhattan area, even though the Manhattan area has the most frequently used stations. A possible explanation for this is due to a farther commute into the Manhattan area. The ending station phenomenon was very strange because there were only a few that distinctively stood out having the longest trip duration. The explanation that I had for the starting stations could play a role since there were many in the Jersey area. But since there are so few, a more logical explanation would be that people may not always return the bikes to a station and they are then later returned to a few of the main station depots, with the total trip time being added on. I was then curious to see how the data breaks down by birth year/

​      When separating the data by birth year; I saw two unexpected results. First, there were birth years all the way into the 1800s, this was obviously not true and was probably due to inaccurate data reporting by the users. Second, there was by far the most users born in 1969. As I searched over the data, I noticed that most of the genders that contained a “0” field, usually had 1969 as the birth year. The “0” field simply means that the gender is unknown. My guess was that the gender of “0” and birth year of 1969 is simply the default setting and is a result when people do not enter their credentials. This also usually occurs with customers rather than subscribers. Customers is probably a one time or occasional use, and the user information is not entered. To solve this problem, I simply filter the years until the bars began to rise on the bar chart, indicating that this was where there was more accurate data being reported. I then took out the “0” gender and it solved the 1969 phenomenon. The visualizations show how the data changed before and after filtering. I was also curious to see how the birth years broke down by gender, this led me into a more in-depth analysis of total trips and how they break down by gender.

​      My final dashboard shows total trips from January to April 2020 and how it breaks down by gender. The first thing that stands out is the drastic decrease in trips after March 2020. This would make sense because march is when many stay and home orders were mandated due to the covid-19 pandemic. One interesting phenomenon that I noticed, was that the male trips decreased significantly while the female trips only slightly. I then created pie charts for each month to see the percent of trips based on gender. Upon investigation of the pie charts the ratio of female to male trips increases during this time. A possible explanation could be that there might be more males in the work force and therefore commuting to work, but with the stay-at-home order the no longer needed to commute. 

 